## **Matter** **and form: reinterpretation of natural philosophy in the Pythagorean school**

Cristóbal Gallardo Alba

### **Introduction**

In contrast to the dominant conception, which considers that
Pythagoreanism represented a break with respect to the philosophy of
nature developed by the school of Miletus, this essay aims to defend the
thesis that its development can only be understood as a deepening of the
trend already initiated by the Ionian philosophers. Such a change of
coordinates would be largely determined by two factors: first, by the
replacement of the concept of *δῐ́κη* as a regulative principle by the
concept of harmony. Secondly, by the replacement of ontological monism,
represented by water, the *άπειρον* and the *πνεϋμα*, by a dualistic
ontology, represented by the opposition *ἄπειρον-πέρας* . This would
have largely determined the progressive displacement of the
organic-materialistic conception of the *φύσις* by an increasingly
mechanistic-formal vision.

In order to develop the above points, I will first proceed to introduce
the defining elements of Ionian and Pythagorean natural philosophy,
which will require their historical contextualization, as well as the
description of the cultural prejudices in which they developed. I
consider it necessary to point out that in the present essay I reject
the dogmatic postmodern conception of history, according to which
historical events are presented as a series of discontinuous fragments;
as opposed to that view, the birth and development of philosophy is
considered, in line with Guthrie, a product of temperament, experience
and earlier philosophers .[^1]

**Development**

Before beginning, it is necessary to define a central concept in the
present text, the concept of philosophy (*φιλοςσοφια*). Etymologically,
the word philosophy only expresses curiosity, fondness or desire to
know, without referring to any particular object. The oldest source in
which it appears corresponds to a fragment of Heraclitus, although
according to Cicero and Diogenes, it was Pythagoras himself who coined
the term. The term *σοφια* has a very broad meaning in the Greek
literary tradition, being applied indistinctly to all kinds of
knowledge, both speculative and practical. In Homer, *σοφός* means a man
skilled in mechanical arts. For Aristotle, philosophy is identical with
c ience , embracing the whole body of human knowledge, distributed in
conformity with the diverse variety of its objects.[^2]

Another backbone concept of the present text is the concept of *φύσις*
(*physis* or nature), which is considered to be the most representative
of the new understanding of the world that began in the 6th century BC
in the city of Miletus[^3] . The meaning of this term, already present
in Homer\'s Odyssey, was widely discussed throughout the 20th
century[^4] . Some scholars have argued that its basic etymological
meaning is related to growth, generation, as well as a force that brings
things into being, as an inexhaustible source of \"beings\". Other
authors consider, however, that this term expresses, in the case of the
pre-Socratic philosophers, the idea of first and permanent substance, of
immutable *substratum* of being, below all the mutations of things.[^5]
Nowadays the idea of the double character, dynamic and static, of the
concept of *φύσις* is widely accepted.

A third fundamental concept to understand the origin of philosophical
thought is the concept of *ἀρχή* (arché), which refers to the
originating cause or primary substance from which all things come, from
which they are formed, and from which all things are resolved. Although
this term appears in literature for the first time in a work by
Aristotle, it is very likely that it was already present in the lexicon
of the Milesian philosophers. In the case of the pre-Socratic
philosophers searching for the first principle, the *ἀρχή* of things,
would itself amount to searching for an ontological reality, since for
them physical being and Being were equivalent concepts [^6][^7] .

A final concept that needs to be defined is that of *κόσμος* (cosmos), a
term untranslatable into English that unites the notion of order,
structural perfection with that of beauty, which occupies a central
position both in the school of Miletus and among the Pythagoreans.

According to Farrington, Greek philosophy was largely nourished by the
substrate provided by the unconscious presuppositions that dominated the
cultural context[^8] . It is for this reason that, before entering into
a discussion of the paradigm shift implied by the development of the
Pythagorean school with respect to the Ionian conception with regard to
the philosophy of nature, I will proceed to describe, succinctly, the
historical and cultural environment of the period in question.

**Historical and cultural context**

It was in the region of Ionia, during the 6th century B.C. that the
first fully rationalistic attempts to describe the nature of the world
began. It is there that European philosophy was born, in the sense of
trying to solve the problems of the Universe solely by means of reason,
as opposed to the assumption of purely mythological or theological
explanations[^9] . Among the various city-states that made up the
region, Miletus stood out above the rest, to which undoubtedly
contributed its advantageous geographical position, with its access to
the Aegean Sea and its natural harbors, which facilitated maritime trade
and cultural exchange with other civilizations, such as Egypt and the
cities of ancient Mesopotamia. There, material prosperity and special
opportunities for contact with other cultures were allied, at least for
a time, with a strong cultural and literary tradition, represented by
epic poetry[^10]

One aspect of Greek thought that would have been of vital importance for
the development of natural philosophy was the dominant religious
consciousness in Ionia during that period, represented by Hesiod\'s
Theogony, which showed an evolutionary character, or spontaneous
development, lacking a theory of creation; unlike Jahwe, the Greek gods
had not created the world[^11] . In this work the omnipotent cosmic
force remains Eros, the power of sexual generation, which constitutes
the only means of generation for all parts of the universe[^12] . Thus,
under the prism of the nascent new conception of reality, oriented
towards the substitution of mythological causes for natural ones, as a
result of the stripping of anthropomorphic imagery, the role of creative
force would have been displaced from that of external compulsion,
represented by Eros, towards that of internal development, represented
by the concept of *φύσις*.[^13]

According to Benjamin Farrington, it is not possible to conceive the
birth of natural philosophy without the enormous influence of Homeric
religion as a leaven to transform the conception of the world of Greek
thought. This author considers that the differential element of Homer is
the inseparable link between historical events and human character,
which makes man, in a sense, the author of his own destiny and not a
mere toy in the hands of the whim of the Fate[^14] . It was a natural
creed for the man of a heroic age, who equated the goodness of life with
bodily prowess in battle, for whom death meant separation from the body,
and with it, from life. Indeed, to speak of the human soul as immortal
was blasphemy.[^15]

Another aspect on which Ionian poetry would have exerted a great
influence, resulting from the boldness of the poets in freely
proclaiming their feelings and their ideas about human life, would have
been the development of individuality, and with it in the emergence of
the rational self. According to Jaeger, this would have led to a
degradation of the old authority figures, as a result of the emergence
of a new concept of universal validity, for which only that which can be
explained by conclusive reasons, that for which individual thought can
give a reason, is true[^16] . This would have favored the substitution
of religious faith for the faith that forms the basis of scientific
knowledge: that autonomous human reason is a sufficient instrument for
understanding the causes that govern the natural world.

The origin of Greek mathematics can also be traced back to the
philosophers of Miletus, an event closely linked to the cultural
exchange with Eastern civilizations. Herodotus himself states that
geometry was probably invented in Egypt. For its part, it would have
been in Babylon where arithmetic would have emerged for the first time,
which would have employed them for the prediction of celestial phenomena
with a great degree of accuracy, around 1500 B.C. However, a
differential aspect between the natural philosophers of Miletus and the
first mathematicians would have been their interest in questioning the
\"why\", instead of focusing only on \"how\". That is, as opposed to the
eminently practical knowledge of the Egyptian and Babylonian thinkers,
centered on the plane of the concrete and the material, in the minds of
the Milesian thinkers a curiosity for the formal aspects would have
begun to develop. The result would be a shift of interest from the
individual perceptions of immediate experience to the universal notions
conceived by the mind, which required to be able to treat concepts in
the abstract, as a unit with its own nature .[^17]

The social and economic development of the region was slowed down during
the 6th century B.C., as a result of the expansion of Persian power over
Asia Minor, which resulted in a progressive loss of political autonomy
of the Ionian cities, as well as an increase in economic and social
inequality. In this new context the Homeric religion, with its
capricious deities, whom one had to try to please with material gifts
offered in a bargaining spirit, but without any certainty that they
would make the required return, began to seem less satisfactory[^18] .
Such a context would have favored the spread of religious ideas such as
Orphism, which offered an ultra-earthly salvation to the victims of
injustice in this world[^19] . Apparently, these were the religious
ideas characteristic of the islands and coastal cities of the Greek
fringe of Asia Minor when Pythagoras (570-490 BC) decided to leave the
island of Samos to escape the tyranny of Polycrates, taking refuge in
Magna Graecia. [^20]

Orphism is, above all, a doctrine of salvation, permeated by a
pessimistic concept of human nature according to which men carry within
themselves an evil, titanic element, and a good, Dionysian one. This
dualism finds expression in the distinction between *ψυχή* (psyche,
soul) immortal, of divine origin, and mortal body, the former being
enclosed in the latter as in a prison or tomb.[^21] The *ψυχή* ,
understood as breath or vital principle that animates the body, acquires
in Orphism a role completely different from that represented in the
Homeric epics. In Homer the soul, despite surviving death, lacks any
transcendental purpose, and its existence is tied to physical life. Its
existence after death is bleak and resembles a meaningless
existence[^22] . For Orphism, as well as for the Pythagoreans, the
*ψυχή* is conceived as an immortal entity *(άθάνατος*) that transcends
the body and can undergo a cycle of reincarnations, which implies a
purpose and destiny beyond physical life. Life in the material world is
seen as a test or a period of purification, from which derives an
express normative element, necessary to guarantee its purity in its
earthly state of union with the body[^23]

One of the central figures of the Orphic doctrine is represented by the
god Apollo, who will occupy a prominent place in the Pythagorean
philosophy, to whose cult they were devoted. Apollo symbolizes the
exaltation of the ideas of limit, moderation and order, as well as the
triumph of the *λογος* (logos), conceived as the intelligible, definite
and measurable, as well as the proportion of things, both in their own
nature and in their relation to the whole . [^24]

Beyond the influence of epic poetry and Orphism, in order to understand
the philosophers of the sixth century, we must first of all get rid of
the Cartesian dualism of matter and mind. The only form of existence
recognized by the pre-Socratic philosophers was existence in space,
i.e., they were not able to understand that something can exist without
spatial extension[^25] . Being and physical being are for the
pre-Socratics equivalent concepts. Another element from which it is
necessary to get rid of is the atomistic conception of dead matter in
mechanical motion. For the early philosophers the world was a living,
eternal, divine creature and lived breathing air or breath of the
infinite that surrounded it[^26] . In fact, for the Greeks, the divine
character was deduced from the fact of immortality: eternal life is the
mark of the divine, and of nothing else.

**Natural philosophy in the school of Miletus.**

According to tradition, Thales (626/623-548/545 BC) is considered the
first European philosopher, although it is not possible to affirm that
with him the line separating the pre-rational, mythical or
anthropomorphic conceptions and the purely rational and scientific
conception was crossed, since it is an entelechy, typical of the
positivist conception of history, to consider the existence of a clear
demarcation between both conceptions [^27][^28] .

For Thales, the *ἀρχή* , the original cause, was water. However, this is
not where his originality lies, since this was a common conception in
Eastern cosmogonies. The originality of his formulations, despite still
being strongly affected by the preceding mythological and
anthropological worldview, lies in the fact that he was the first to
attempt to explain natural phenomena from modifications in nature
itself, or what is the same, that the causes that operated in the
beginning must have been similar to those that operate now, which earned
him the recognition of Aristotle himself .[^29]

It is with Anaximander (610-546 BC), considered to be the most important
figure among the Milesian physicists, with whom appears the first
description in purely natural terms of the origin of the world and of
life, described in terms of organic life in line with the threadzoist
conception of reality[^30] . The latter considers that the first
substance, the *ἀρχή* , must not have been a state of tangible matter,
but a kind of basic common denominator of all sensible things arrived at
by a process of abstraction, to which he gave the name *άπειρον* (the
indefinite).[^31] Such a concept has both a temporal sense (the arché of
all things cannot itself have a beginning), as well as a spatial one,
that is a body without internal limits, or what is the same, without
distinguishable elements (it is unlikely that Anaximander was able to
grasp the notion of strict spatial or quantitative infinity).[^32] This
would represent a great progress towards the abstract understanding of
matter, for whose comprehension the senses are not enough, but it
requires to be apprehended by the mind[^33] . Thus arises the notion of
the non-perceptible.

The *άπειρον* is presented in Anaximander as a fertile matrix, from
which the *κόσμος* germinates[^34] through a process of separation
(*εκκκρισις*, *άπόκρισις*), or of differentiation of opposites[^35] .
The organic conception of reality would have determined Anaximander to
understand *φύσις* as intrinsically dynamic, as the driving force of a
process of unfolding characterized by eternal motion, thus linking in a
single concept, ἄπειρα *φύσις*, the forces of nature and the material
origin of all that exists[^36] . Such a process would be governed by the
δῐ́κη , a regulating principle through which order would be achieved.

In coherence with the organic conception of the existent, what is born
and generated, once completed, must degenerate and die. This is the
framework from which the existence of infinite worlds, contained in
Anaximander\'s cosmogony, should be interpreted. This interpretation is
in contradiction with the one presented in Fraile\'s work, in which it
is stated that the destruction of the worlds would result from the
struggle between equal opposites . [^37]This divergence can be
understood on the basis of two highly questionable premises. First,
Fraile equates the term *δῐ́κη* to the ethico-legal concept of the Law of
Talion, according to which justice would be equivalent to equality
between opposites. Second, Fraile assumes the pair *κόσμος* limited (
*πεπρασμμένοι* ) and *άπειρον* unlimited as a contraposition of equal
contraries.

Contrary to the premises assumed by Fraile, the concept of *δῐ́κη* should
be understood not only as a redistributive principle, but as a means by
which everything exists in proper relation to the other and by which the
good is realized, in accordance to the conception of Homeric poetry, in
which the concept of *δῐ́κη* is opposed both to \"injustice\" and to
uncivilized or savage behavior[^38] . Second, despite the notion of
opposites being a fundamental feature in Greek thought of the time,
which probably influenced Anaximander\'s thought, it is necessary to
point out that before the formation of the *κόσμος* , opposites as such
were still non-existent[^39] . That is to say, to consider that the
*κόσμμος* and the *άπειρον* are related as a pair of equal contraries
does not seem accurate, since it would require assuming an ontological
dualism that has no place in Anaximander\'s thought. It is therefore
logical to think that the notion of *δῐ́κη* would not correspond to that
of a law tending to the reestablishment of equality between opposites,
but as a principle regulating the development of *κόσμος* , which once
it fulfills its possibilities, would undergo a process of degradation,
to return again to the άπειρον, from which everything arises, and to
which everything must return.

Finally, according to Jaeger, Anaximander\'s conception of the earth and
the world would represent the triumph of the geometric spirit, which is
described as constructed by means of rigorous mathematical proportions,
developing the assumption, already present in Homer and Hesiod, that the
world is ordered and determinable [^40][^41] .

Anaximenes (585-528/524 BC), a disciple of Anaximander, is considered
the last of the great philosophers of the school of Miletus. For him, as
for his teacher, the *κόσμος* was conceived as a living animal, endowed
with respiration; likewise, the *ἀρχή* should be in perpetual
self-caused motion, which would make its changes possible. From here
probably comes his concept of *ἀρχή* as *ἀήρ* (air) , given the
relationship existing in that period the living, i.e., that which
possesses *ψυχή, the* *πνεῦμα* (breath, wind) and the *ἀήρ* [^42][^43] .
However, it is not the above where the originality of his thought lies,
but in his attempt to rationally explain the mechanism by which the
*ἀρχή* would have given rise to the various elements. To this end,
Anaximenes would have tried to identify processes that could be verified
in actuality to explain the transformations of matter, which led him to
propose condensation and rarefaction [^44][^45] . According to Guthrie,
by attempting to explain all qualitative differences in matter by the
different degrees of condensation and rarefaction of the one basic
matter, his proposal would represent the first attempt to explain
qualitative changes in matter from quantitative differences.[^46]
Finally, according to extant sources, Anaximenes did not think that all
natural substances derived directly from the *πνεϋμα*, but that there
were certain basic forms, such as fire, water, and earth, of which other
types were compounds. If true he would be the pioneer in considering the
existence of simple substances and compound substances .[^47]

**Natural philosophy in the Pythagorean school**

Before introducing the foundations of Pythagorean natural philosophy, it
is necessary to clarify that the scarcity of original writings has
greatly hindered the understanding of its doctrines, Aristotle being the
main source of information through numerous references scattered in
various books[^48] . This is not only due to the loss of records, but
also to the very nature of the school , whose intention was to make it
difficult for anyone who was not a member of the brotherhood itself to
understand its teachings[^49] . This has conditioned Pythagoreanism to
be considered as a unity in which it is difficult to distinguish
significant internal differences despite the multiple personalities that
contributed to its development .[^50]

Another aspect to highlight before going deeper into the study of the
Pythagorean school is the fact that for Pythagoreanism the religious
aspect, largely inspired by Orphism, and the philosophical doctrine,
were not two separate dimensions, but two inseparable factors of a
single way of life. In fact, prominent members of the school were named
in antiquity as referents of the Orphic tradition .[^51]

With Pythagoreanism the motive of philosophy ceased to be primarily what
it had been for the Ionian philosophers, namely intellectual curiosity
or technical improvement, and became the search for a way of life by
which a right relationship with the universe could be established[^52] .
For them a full human life ultimately required a total detachment from
the body, an escape from the wheel of rebirth and the ultimate bliss of
losing oneself in the universal, eternal and divine soul, for which
philosophy, and more specifically music and mathematical research,
proved to be the most convenient way [^53][^54] .

*ἁφύσις δ*᾿ *ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ ἁρμόχθη ἁρμόχθη ἐξ* *ἀπείρων τε καὶ περαινόντων
καὶ ὅλος ὁ κόσμος καὶ τὰ ἐν αὐτῷ πάντα*[^55] . Such an expression,
attributed to Philolaus of Tarentum, would represent the change that the
concept of φύσις underwent under the influence of the Pythagorean
school. The *φύσις* would cease to be eternal, becoming the product of
the harmonic union of two principles, *ἀπείρων* (the unlimited) and the
*περαινόντων* (the limited), which are themselves eternal and pre-exist
the κόσμος. With this, the φύσις would lose its character of organic
development, adopting a passive character .[^56]

**Harmony as the organizing element of the cosmos**

The term *ἁρμονία* (harmony) appears already in Homer\'s Odyssey, in the
sense of union or interlocking of things, as well as the material
support with which they were joined. From the 5th century onwards it was
associated especially with the stringing of a stringed instrument of
different tensions, and thus also with the creation of the musical
scale[^57] . Its mathematical dimension, understood as the relationship
and balance between different elements through proportions and numerical
patterns, is, however, due to Pythagoras himself, who is considered the
discoverer that the basic intervals of Greek music could be represented
by the proportions 1:2, 3:2 and 4:3[^58] . According to Jaeger, the
discovery that music responded to a mathematical order represented a
turning point in Pythagoras\' thinking, since the generalization of the
numerical legislation of music to the whole cosmos would have led him to
try to explain all reality in mathematical terms, and thus to the
discovery of the \"mathematics of nature[^59][^60] .

The discovery of harmony would also lead to a new conception of the
divine, which was linked not only to the eternal, as in the case of the
Milesian philosophers, but above all to the fact of being constituted by
a combination of elements in harmonic order, that is, according to the
rules of mathematical proportions[^61] . Undoubtedly, this determined to
a great extent that numbers possessed for the Pythagoreans a mystical
meaning and an independent reality, to which phenomena were secondary.
We must not forget that the ultimate goal of Pythagoreanism was
assimilation to the divine, and since the divine possessed a numerical
character, what better than the study of the mathematical structure of
the *κόσμος* to achieve assimilation, since they considered that the
philosopher, by associating himself with what is divine manages to
divinize himself[^62] . This would explain, at least in part, the shift
of interest in Pythagorean natural philosophy from the basic matter of
the universe and the physical changes by which it had come into
existence, to an understanding of order.

**Ontological dualism**

Although the general doctrine of opposites in nature was shared both by
the thinkers of the school of Miletus and by the Pythagoreans, it is
with the latter that it would have acquired a leading character.
According to Guthrie, the monistic interpretation of the Pythagorean
school, which grants a central role to the ideal One and unity as the
origin of all that exists, is undoubtedly Platonic in character .[^63]

A key element that distinguishes the Pythagorean doctrine from Ionian
philosophy is the fact that it is rooted in the moral concepts of good
and evil, another aspect it shares with Orphism. This determined that in
Pythagorean thought, despite lacking full internal coherence, is
dominated by a pair of opposites, which manifest themselves in many
different ways. Thus, unity, limit, even, clear, etc. are associated
with goodness, while plurality, unlimited, odd, dark, etc. are
considered evil[^64] . This duality is also reflected in the
anthropological aspect, according to which man consists of two distinct
parts: the body, composed of material elements, and the soul, of
celestial origin[^65] . And not only that, but the ψυχή itself would
possess for the Pythagoreans a dualistic character, distinguishing a
soul of material character, which would \"vanish like smoke\" after
death, and the δαίμων (demon), of immortal and divine character, which
underwent transmission through many bodies .[^66]

The dualistic conception of reality appears also reflected in their
understanding *φύσις*. For the Pythagoreans the basic notions that would
allow to explain development of the world are those of *πέρας* (limit)
and *ἄπειρον* (unlimited)[^67] . While it is true that, as various
sources state, they revered the One (τὸ *ἓν*) as the divine, this would
not have existed eternally, but would be assimilated to a kind of seed,
the seed of the world, the limited ( *περασμένον* ), resulting from the
intersection of *πέρας* and *ἄπειρον*[^68] . Such a conception is
closely linked to the concept of harmony. Thus, in analogy with music,
just as melodic order derives from the ordered delimitation, through the
notes, of the unlimited element of blank intervals, the order of the
cosmos would derive from the imposition of the *πέρας* on the
*ἄπειρον*[^69] . In this scheme, the unit was considered as the starting
point of the numerical series, but not as belonging to it, since every
real number must be either even or odd, and the unit, curiously enough,
was conceived as a combination in itself of even and odd. That is, it is
both the one-dimensional unit of construction and the dimensionless
point of contact between two sections .[^70]

Before continuing, I consider it necessary to make three points about
the limitations of the conceptual apparatus available to the Pythagorean
philosophers, which will allow us to better understand in role that
numbers in relation to the *φύσις* . First, the fact that they conceived
of everything in existence as extensive largely prevented them from
being able to distinguish between concrete and abstract numbers
[^71][^72] . Second, the Pythagoreans would have experienced difficulty
in distinguishing clearly between the concepts of \"similarity\" and
\"identity,\" a difficulty deeply rooted in the Greek consciousness of
the time, given that there was only one word to designate both terms:
*όμοιος*[^73] . Finally, the distinction between form and matter had not
yet received a clear formulation, so that in describing the structural
scheme of things they believed they were also describing their material
nature[^74] , which would have largely determined that Pythagorean
mathematics was inseparable from their physics .[^75]

Returning to the generation of the One, for the Pythagoreans the
Unity-point, generated from the imposition of the *πέρας on the,* would
also constitute the basis of physical matter, something like a primitive
form of atom[^76] . The emergence of the Unity-point would thus
represent the first manifestation of the harmony of the *κόσμος*, and
with it the birth of the *φύσις*, as reflected in the work of Philolaus
of Tarentum. With all this, despite the manifestly mechanical character
of such a conception, the Pythagoreans would not have abandoned the idea
of the infinite breath of the Universe, through which the void would be
introduced, defined as \"that which separates and divides the things
that are next to each other\"[^77] . In this we also perceive the loss
of the organic character of the world, since the concept of πνεῦμα
ceases to be linked to the concept of *ψυχή,* common in the Milesian
philosophers. Thus, as a result of the introduction of the void into the
bosom of the Point-Unit, and its consequent division, the rest of the
elements of the numerical series would arise (the number two, for
example, would result from two Point-Units, separated by the void). In a
following stage, from the spatial order of the dot-units, grouped in
sets, would emerge the geometric figures, each of which, in turn, was
associated with the various elements [^78][^79] . Thus, for example, the
tetrahedron would correspond to the properties of fire, and the cube to
those of the earth. E n synthesis, *ὁ ἀριθμός ἐστιν ἀρχὴ πάντων τῶν
ὄντων .*[^80]

### Conclusion

From the above it does not seem adventurous to affirm that, if we had to
choose a term to describe the changes that the notion φύσις underwent in
its journey from the Ionian school to the Pythagorean school, this would
be μεταβολή (transformation), understood as a change in the nature of
something. And the fact is that, although the Pythagorean conception of
number as the principle of things is preformed both in the rigorous
geometric symmetry of the cosmos of Anaximander [^81][^82]and in the
intention of Anaximenes to explain qualitative changes from quantitative
changes[^83] , with the Pythagorean school, by generalizing the concept
of harmony of opposites as the backbone of its conception of reality,
the very concept of φύσις would have undergone a mutation.

**Bibliography**

Alexander, T. (1988). Arche, Dike, Phusis: Anaximander\'s Principle of
Natural Justice. *Southwest Philosophical Studies*, *10*(3).

Cornford, F. M. (1922). Mysticism and science in the Pythagorean
tradition. *The Classical Quarterly*, *16*(3-4), 137-150. Page 10.

Farrington, B. (1972). *Science and philosophy*. Ariel, Barcelona.

Filippi, S. (1985). The rationalization of the world in Aristotle\'s
thought. A premise for the education of Greek man.

Fraile, G. (1990). *Historia de la filosofia/1 Grecia y Roma/por
Guillermo Fraile* (Vol. 160). Biblioteca de Autores Cristianos.

Guthrie, W. K. C., & Warren, J. (2012). *The Greek philosophers: from
Thales to Aristotle*. Routledge.

Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume I.

Jaeger, W. (1945). *Paideia: the ideals of culture*. Fondo de cultura
económica.

Kirk, G. S., Raven, J. E., & Schofield, M. (1983). *The presocratic
philosophers: A critical history with a selection of texts*.

Leonid, Z. (2018). Physis in the Pythagorean tradition. *Philologia
classica*, *13*(1), 50-68. Page 12.

Oñate, T., & García Santos, C. (2004). *The birth of philosophy in
Greece: a journey to the beginning of the West*. Dykinson.

[^1]:  Guthrie, W. K. C., & Warren, J. (2012). *The Greek philosophers:
    from Thales to Aristotle* . Page 18.

[^2]:  Fraile, G. (1990). Historia de la filosofia. Page 1-2.

[^3]:  Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume I.
    Page 82.

[^4]: Leonid, Z. (2018). Physis in the Pythagorean tradition.
    *Philologia classica*, *13*(1), 50-68.

[^5]:  Burnet, J. (1908). *Early Greek philosophy* . A. & C. Black. Page
    12.

[^6]:  Fraile, G. (1990). Historia de la filosofia. Page 140,141.

[^7]: Oñate, T., & García Santos, C. (2004). *The birth of philosophy in
    Greece: journey to the beginning of the West*. Page 89.

[^8]:  Farrington, B. (1972). *Science and philosophy in antiquity*.
    Page 29.

[^9]:  Guthrie, W. K. C., & Warren, J. (2012). *The Greek philosophers:
    from Thales to Aristotle*. Page 22.

[^10]:  Kirk , G. S., Raven, J. E., & Schofield, M. (1983). *The
    presocratic philosophers: A critical history with a selection of
    texts*. Page 90.

[^11]: Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume I.
    Page 142.

[^12]: Idem. Page 28.

[^13]: Idem. Page 82.

[^14]:  Farrington, B. (1972). *Science and philosophy in antiquity*.
    Page 29.

[^15]: Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume I.
    Page 196.

[^16]:  Jaeger, W. (1945). Paideia: the ideals of culture. Fondo de
    cultura económica. Page 153.

[^17]:  Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume
    I. Page 31-37.

[^18]:  I dem. Page 197.

[^19]: A feature of Orphic teaching was its apparently conscious rivalry
    with Homer. Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy
    Volume I. Page 65,212.

[^20]:  Farrington, B. (1972). *Science and philosophy*. Page 42.

[^21]:  Fraile, G. (1990). Historia de la filosofia. Page 124-125.

[^22]:  Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume
    I. Page 196.

[^23]:  Jaeger, W. (1945). Paideia: the ideals of culture. Page 165.

[^24]:  Idem . Page 220.

[^25]:  Kirk, Raven & Schofield (1983). The presocratic philosophers.
    Page 243.

[^26]:  Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume
    I. Page 201.

[^27]:  Fraile, G. (1990). Historia de la filosofia. Page 14 2.

[^28]: Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume I.
    Page 1.

[^29]: Idem. Page 68, 142.

[^30]:  Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume
    I. Page 91.

[^31]:  Farrington, B. (1972). *Science and philosophy*. Page 34.

[^32]:  Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume
    I. Page 85.

[^33]:  Farrington, B. (1972). *Science and philosophy*. Page 34.

[^34]: Theophrastus employs the word γονίμον (gonimon), an adjective
    meaning \"generative\", \"fertile\", used to describe the
    development of eggs and semiillas. Alexander, T. (1988). Arche,
    Dike, Phusis: Anaximander\'s Principle of Natural Justice. Page 3.

[^35]: Idem.

[^36]: According to Burnet, the concept of ἀρχή as a first principle is
    not due to Anaximander himself, but to Theophrastus, from whom most
    of his doctrine is derived. Burnet, J. (1908). *Early Greek
    philosophy*. A. & C. Black. Page 57.

[^37]:  Fraile, G. (1990). Historia de la filosofia. Page 147.

[^38]:  Alexander, T. (1988). Arche, Dike, Phusis: Anaximander\'s
    Principle of Natural Justice. *Southwest Philosophical Studies*,
    *10*(3).

[^39]:  Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume
    I. Page 87.

[^40]:  Jaeger, W. (1945). Paideia: the ideals of culture. Page 156.

[^41]:  Kirk, Raven & Schofield (1983). The presocratic philosophers.
    Page 154.

[^42]:  Fraile, G. (1990). Historia de la filosofia. Page 148.

[^43]:  Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume
    I. Page 126.

[^44]:  Kirk, Raven & Schofield (1983). The presocratic philosophers.
    page 163.

[^45]: Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume I.
    Page 120.

[^46]:  Idem . Page 126.

[^47]:  Kirk, Raven & Schofield (1983). The presocratic philosophers.
    page 166.

[^48]:  Fraile, G. (1990). Historia de la filosofia. Page 15 1.

[^49]:  Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume
    I. Page 147.

[^50]: Idem. Page 147.

[^51]: Idem. Page 198.

[^52]: Idem. Page 148.

[^53]: Idem. Page 8205.

[^54]:  Fraile, G. (1990). Historia de la filosofia. Page 153.

[^55]: Nature in the cosmos was constructed/harmonized from the
    unlimited and limited, both the entire cosmos and everything in it.

[^56]:  Leonid, Z. (2018). Physis in the Pythagorean tradition.
    *Philologia classica*, *13*(1), 50-68. Page 12.

[^57]: Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume I
    . Page 220.

[^58]:  Idem . Page 224

[^59]:  Fraile, G. (1990). Historia de la filosofia. Page 160.

[^60]:  Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume
    I. Page 220, 237.

[^61]: Idem. Page 308.

[^62]: That like is known by like was considered a serious philosophical
    doctrine in the 5th century B.C., being also taken up by Empedocles.
    Another important preconception when it comes to understanding the
    value that the Pythagoreans give to numbers is their conception that
    all of nature is akin, so that the soul of man is intimately related
    to the living and divine universe. Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A
    History of Greek Philosophy Volume I. Page 206, 209, 210.

[^63]:  Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume
    I. Page 249

[^64]:  Idem . Page 245.

[^65]:  Fraile, G. (1990). Historia de la filosofia. Page 1 61.

[^66]:  Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume
    I. Page 319.

[^67]: Idem. Page 207, 242.

[^68]: Idem. Page 247, 248.

[^69]:  Cornford, F. M. (1922). Mysticism and science in the Pythagorean
    tradition. *The Classical Quarterly*, *16*(3-4), 137-150. Page 10.

[^70]:  Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume
    I. Page 240.

[^71]: Idem. Page 234.

[^72]:  Fraile, G. (1990). Historia de la filosofia. Page 1 56.

[^73]:  Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume
    I. Page 230.

[^74]: Idem. Page 238.

[^75]: Farrington, B. (1972). *Science and philosophy*. Page 46.

[^76]:  Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume
    I. Page 251, 259.

[^77]: Idem. Page 277.

[^78]:  Idem. Page 266.

[^79]: Idem. Page 272.

[^80]: Number is the beginning of all things. Philolaus of Tarentum,
    fragment B4.

[^81]: Kirk, Raven & Schofield (1983). The presocratic philosophers.
    page 154.

[^82]:  Jaeger, W. (1945). Paideia: the ideals of culture. Page 161.

[^83]:  Guthrie, W. K. C. (1995). A History of Greek Philosophy Volume
    I. Page 126.
